now this is a shortened version of a
very simple talk about uh
stars and planets and what what they are
and
a few very fundamental aspects
so stars shine by their own light
because they are hot they're releasing
energy
from their cores where they're
converting hydrogen
the most common element in the universe
to helium
and planets on the other hand do not
shine by their own light
we can only see them because they
reflect the light
from the sun or their parent star if
they orbit a different star
and um
they are only kept warm by the heat from
that parent star
as our star being the sun the sun is a
very
ordinary star in fact it's on the small
side as we
shall see uh now planet means wanderer
in greek and literally just meant
anything that
moved across the sky and was visible so
to the ancient greeks the moon and the
sun were also
deemed planets along with the uh
major planets that they knew about which
was mercury venus
earth mars jupiter and saturn
there's loads of people joining in now i
knew that would happen
i'll let them in but i can see them paul
silas i mean while you're dealing with
it jonathan that's great yeah
um
the third class of object we have is
moons and moons
orbit around planets and so obviously
we have our own moon uh mars has moons
and so forth
and then there are various smaller
members of the solar system which we
shall come
onto and talk about separately so
when we look up in the night sky we see
lots of lights up there most of them are
stars and we see that they are
different brightnesses and different
colors and so just a brief introduction
as to
why they are different brightnesses and
different colors even
the color relates to how hot they are
so things begin to glow when you heat
them up to about 3000 degrees
they become red hot if you heat an iron
bar it'll glow red
keep going it'll go orange then yellow
then white and then it'll probably melt
but stars can become hotter even than
that
and they go from white hot to blue hot
so the temperature very much uh is a
flag
as to the color for stars and it's
usually an indication of their mass as
well because
for ordinary stars the more massive they
are
the hotter they burn so the small
red dwarfs at the bottom here the sun in
the middle here is a
fairly ordinary yellow star and then the
brighter white and blue stars are the
most massive ones
now the reason that they look different
brightnesses can either be
because they are more or less powerful
in in themselves or it can be that they
are
at different distances so bright ones
are either
nearby or very powerful
and further away faint ones
are either not very bright or just a
very long way to eat
and it would be very helpful for us to
be able to classify them if we actually
were able to measure the distance of
course
and we'll come on to how we do that
later
of course there are other confounding
factors in this if there are
obscuring clouds of dust in between
us and a distant star it can make it
look
fainter than it really would be for the
distance
but if we classify all the ordinary
stars
according to their absolute power output
which we plot up the side here and their
color which is an indication of
temperature as i've said
then all the ordinary stars fall along
this diagonal line here
from the red dwarfs up through the
orange yellow
white and blue stars getting more
massive
you can see the sun here one unit one
solar mass these little stars here are a
third of a solar mass or a tenth of a
solar mass
and burn more uh
quietly and less powerfully it's a lower
temperature
the higher the mass going up here the
faster and hotter they burn
as for sizes just give you a relative
size of a few things we've got the inner
planets which we will talk more about
tonight
here mercury mars venus and the earth in
order of size
small rocky planets but then if we jump
scales to box number two
and shrink the earth to this size you
see the four
giant gaseous planets much larger
and again jump to box three and shrink
jupiter down
to a small object here we've got the
first few stars
a little tiny red dwarf called wolf 359
the sun rather larger and the bright
star
sirius the brightest star that we see in
the sky
apart from our sun and that's because
it's a little bit more powerful but it's
also
very close to us but it's by no means a
giant star because if we
pop sirius down to here on change the
scale
we have pollux arcturus and aldebaran
getting
progressively larger and we haven't
finished yet
because we can carry on into box five
and shrink aldebaran all the way down to
here
and then we have rigel and betelgeuse
both in orion
and antares in scorpio as these
absolutely
massive stars and that's not the end the
largest
stars are these in this uh box six
we've shrunk antares down and so we've
got
s doradus ky cigna and vv
sephi one of the largest known stars
absolutely vast and about 200 times
the mass of our sun
now i mentioned that what stars do is
burn
hydrogen in a nuclear fusion process and
this was the cause of uh much
study back in the late 1800s by
lord kelvin he asked the question what
powers a star
he tried to work out what the source of
energy might be
because he realized that the hot object
would cool down
over time less new energy was being
provided
all the time as we went along and he
wondered what that sort of energy might
be
being a good victorian scientist he
compared it to steam engines
the powerhouses of the day and the
burning of coal
and he worked out that if the entire
sun was made of coal and burning
it would only give enough uh only have
enough fuel
to keep it burning and producing the
energy that it does
for three thousand years and he knew
that was wrong because
even back in victorian times they knew
that uh
the chinese history went back further
than that
and indeed the uh dates of the pyramids
and so forth so the age of the earth
was considerably older than just a few
thousand years
of course what he didn't know back then
because it wasn't discovered until 1896
was anything about radioactivity and
nuclear energy and the power locked in
the core
in the nucleus of the atom which is
thousands of times more
than is available from chemical energy
such as
burning of coal and so stars are giant
pressure cookers
which have gravity squeezing the
material
inwards the force of gravity increases
with the mass of the star
pulling the material together and
as the material is squeezed into the
center
the temperature goes up that's what
happens when you squash gases
and so you you get a very very uh high
temperature right in the center
sufficient to trigger these nuclear
processes off and
they release energy and then that energy
release
resists the collapsing force of gravity
and puts the star into a more or less
stable configuration so long as the fuel
continues to be available to burn when i
say burn i
mean nuclear fusion and that's depicted
in this little diagram here
where we have the simplest elements in
the universe
one proton hydrogen nuclei these red
things
we smack two of them together and make a
two particle nucleus one of them
is forced to turn into a neutron and
that's a heavy version of hydrogen we
add a third particle to make helium
three
and then we smash two helium threes
together to make helium four and get two
of our original protons back so you can
see we've put in one
two three four five six protons
we get two back we've used up four and
we end up with a four particle helium
nucleus
it's fairly straightforward and that
each stage there releases a little flash
of energy
and those flashes of energy add up to
the heat released
by the star now
that's uh planets are completely
different they do not
generate heat by nuclear fusion they
only
get heat from the parent star only get
light from the parent star
and of course they orbit around it the
definition of a planet
is something that orbits a star and
which is not a star
itself because sometimes we can have two
stars orbiting each other in our binary
system or
a more complicated arrangement
and so we're going to hear about the
planets just a few pictures of them for
now
mercury venus about the same size as
earth covered in clouds
the earth itself our moon
and mars are the inner solar system
and there are mostly rocky planets
then we have the asteroid belt which
doesn't look quite like this artist's
impression
you could fly through it and not see
another space rock
they're separated by much greater
distances than
this gives as an impression we'll hear
about those later
and then we get the outer planets this
is the planet jupiter with its great red
spot
it's actually a photograph that i took
with my home observatory
here from our cambridgeshire back garden
was quite pleased with it
saturn with its amazing ring systems
the rather bland but nevertheless
interesting uranus
and the lovely blue neptune with the
great dark spot
imaged by voyager 2 here and those are
the major planets but of course there's
pluto as well
and this is the fabulous photograph
taken by
the new horizons space probe that flew
past pluto
a few years ago now absolutely fantastic
resolution
we'll hear more about pluto but pluto
got demoted
and poor pluto is no longer a major
planet
in 2006 the international astronomical
unit
decided that frankly it was too small
and
if we let pluto be a planet well we were
discovering lots of other
wandering space rocks in the solar
system that really ought to be
called planets as well and we'd have
dozens of them before long
and uh we really ought to do something
about what we meant by
planets not just using the greek word
wanderer
we'll also hear about the moons and
sometimes the moons of these planets
are by far the most interesting the uh
moons
are things that orbit planets planets
are things that orbit stars
we'll hear about comets this is a
fabulous photograph
of comet mcnaught from a few years ago
with its amazing tale
we hear about meteors and jonathan
mentioned while we were chatting that
tonight there is a meteor shower tonight
and tomorrow night the lyrid meteor
showers
where if you want to stay up till around
midnight you've got a chance of seeing
some bright shooting stars coming flying
in from outer space
and we'll also talk about the structure
of
the solar system and the whole of the
universe
from the ideas of the ancient greeks
like aristotle
onwards to their latest thinking on
cosmology
dark matter dark energy and the big bang
so that's going to be the whole of the
course in a nutshell
and with that i will hand over now to
our main speaker
and